# Environments

Environments are their own universe. They contain all of the current schemas for your domains. They also keep a log of all commands issued to the environment, and a log of as all resulting events from those commands.

They are where schemas for domains are created, imported, reshaped, and tested. They may be a particular release of your application. They may be a clone of an existing environment when developing, testing and staging new releases. Or, they may just be a sandbox for playing around with a set of domain schemas when in development.

### Creating an environment

To create a new environment, simply run the following statement:

	> create environment 'release-0.8.12';

	Command(s) successful. Last command identifier 'f7b419ac-e497-422b-802a-b7cad4a76d9e'.

	> _

### Renaming an environment

If you're unhappy with the name of the current environment, you can rename it at any time with the following statement:

	> rename environment 'release-0.8.12' to 'release-0.8.13';

	Command(s) successful. Last command identifier '3aba3604-0ed9-4e50-87f9-04efd2e3ab81'.

	> _


### Deleting an environment

If you no longer need an environment, you can delete it permanently from your server. Keep in mind, that this **will render all domain schemas, command and event logs irretrievable**. This can be done with the following statement:

	> delete environment 'release-0.8.13';

	Command(s) successful. Last command identifier 'c8dc21a6-cecd-43db-8c7f-b85be90d430a'.

	> _

### Reverting an environment

Sometimes you will make mistakes when shaping your schema and will want to revert it to a previous version. You can revert an environment by specifing the last identifier of the command you were happy with.

**Note**: Reverting an environment back to a schema command identifier will delete any domain command/event log data generated after that identifier.

	> create environment 'release-0.8.12';

	Command(s) successful. Last command identifier 'f7b419ac-e497-422b-802a-b7cad4a76d9e'.

	> rename environment 'release-0.8.12' to 'inappropriate-name';

	Command(s) successful. Last command identifier '3aba3604-0ed9-4e50-87f9-04efd2e3ab81'.

	> # Whoops, didn't mean to rename the environment...
	> revert environment 'inappropriate-name' to command 'f7b419ac-e497-422b-802a-b7cad4a76d9e';

	Command(s) successful. Last command identifier 'f7b419ac-e497-422b-802a-b7cad4a76d9e'.

	> _

### Rewinding an environment

Sometimes you want to test a particular piece of business logic until you get it right. Rewinding an environment will bring all domains back to a particular point in time. You can rewind an environment by specifying the last identifier of the command dispatched to the environment.

	> rewind environment 'release-0.8.12' to command '757a54e6-e555-48bb-855a-272046d954dd';

	Command(s) successful. Last command identifier '757a54e6-e555-48bb-855a-272046d954dd'.

	> _

### Using an environment

You will be working mostly within a single environment at a time. To save time writing statements, you can include the use statement at the beginning of a session so that it doesn't need to be included in any following statements. You can do this by running the following statement:

	> use environment 'release-0.8.13';

	Environment set to 'release-0.8.13'.

	> _

### Cloning an environment

Sometimes, you might want to make changes to your domain schemas, but preserve the existing domain log data in your current environment. For this, you can clone a new environment from an existing one. You can do this by running the following statement:

	> clone environment 'release-0.8.13' from 'release-0.8.12';

	Environment 'release-0.8.13' successfully cloned from 'release-0.8.12'.

	> _

If you would like to clone an environment with all of the command and event log data, you can run the following statement:

	> clone environment 'release-0.8.13' from 'release-0.8.12' with logs;

	Environment 'release-0.8.13' successfully cloned from 'release-0.8.12'.

	> _


